My general message to people who do AI
is to do two things. Ask the experts and
ask children.
>> I've got some children.
>> I know.
>> I volunteer.
>> I know. But listen, remember, children
are learning machines. Experts have
corpuses of knowledge. If you combine an
expert with a child, you'll get an
incredible device because the child is a
learning machine. The child will ask
questions like, "Why are you doing this
this way? Take a child to a doctor's
office and make them look at how billing
is done and they'll say, "That's the
stupidest thing I've ever seen in my
life."
>> And they would be right.
[Music]
>> Welcome to the General Podcast, the show
where there's no host, no script, just
the best builders talking about what
they do and why they do it.
>> I've always been a fan of yours. I think
you know that. and we've met before.
We've had coffee. I think for me, just
finding somebody who is at the
intersection of medicine and
communications and has written books.
We've had some similar trajectories in
our careers. And um you're obviously far
more steeped on the clinical side, but
both of us very passionate about just
communication in general. And um I love
the way you write. So for me, it was it
was a obvious heck yes. Um, well,
Chrissy, you're an amazing journalist.
Um, you know, you've written widely,
broadly, um, you cover issues that are
dear to my heart, uh, medicine books,
and most recently tech, um, and tech
entrepreneurship. Um, and so, generally
speaking, I don't do a lot of podcasts.
Um, but they said, "Oh, Chrissy Far is
doing it." And I was like, "Okay, I'll
do it." So, that's that was that's my
answer.
>> That's a that's a huge compliment. Um I
feel like the last time we met too this
whole AI thing was I mean it was
certainly around people were doing a lot
of interesting stuff with machine
learning and you wrote about a lot of it
in in the books but certainly not this
LLM craze that we now see. So that's one
of the first things that I wanted to
talk to you about because the clinical
profession is about to see I think some
absolutely transformational
change. Um, some people think that AI is
really just hype. Um, and all smoke and
mirrors, but I think most people in the
technology world that that I spend time
with do believe that this is something
real. Um, and it's coming and no one
quite knows exactly how deep it's going
to penetrate into medicine, but I think
it's kind of widely already, you know,
starting. I go to conferences these days
and I ask people, you know, raise your
hand if you're using AI or an LLM to
diagnose yourself and twothirds of the
room will say that they are, including
physicians. A lot has changed um since
we last met. How are you feeling about
this whole AI thing?
>> Well, the first thing is to just to
distinguish within between AI in general
and LLMs. LM LLMs are large language
models are just one aspect of many
aspects of of AI and machine learning.
Um so I think would be helpful for
listeners especially people who are
interested in medicine and science to
create a kind of typology of um where
and how um medicine is intersecting with
AI um including LLMs. The typology goes
from simple to complex. Um the simplest
um
one which really has to do with language
models and is related to what uh Richard
Fineman called cargo cult medicine or
cargo cult science. Cargo cult science
is basically in Fineman's idea cargo
cult science is it's a long story. I
won't describe why but sort of science
and medicine as enterprise objects. So
nothing learning about it nothing
nothing particularly deep about it but
just to make things easier make make
life easier. So what does that mean? It
means in science it means things like
grant writing um grants management
sec management um personnel management
data mining data resources etc. This
isn't obviously very deep or complex
work but it's important work because it
takes time away from the creative
enterprise of science. And just in
similarly in medicine it would be things
like um notes and notewriting billing um
and bill generation. These are huge
pains.
>> It's just hours absolutely
>> hours and hours of time and and you know
lots of mistakes etc you know that
happen. Um now we have um the beginning
of ambient um listening modes. These
ambient listening modes feed into
electronic medical records, EMRs. These
EMRs can be scraped by um language
models and so that you can do things
like you know that seem very mundane but
actually are very time consuming. So
prior authorization, follow-up,
scheduling etc.
>> This is very lowlying fruit. Um but this
is either coming or already has come. If
one is interested in these kinds of
applications, they're gone. People, this
is a a vastly crowded space and is
making great progress, will be very
useful, free up a lot of time for
patients, for physicians to be able to
deliver real care to patients, which is
of course what patients want. Patients
want you to talk to them. They don't
want you to type on a computer while
you're while you're finding out, you
know, how they're doing. Moving onwards
a little bit more. Um I would say um
there's the whole diagnostic sphere in
medicine. Um and in science it would be
the um the data mining sphere. Um and
they're analogous. So the diagnostic
sphere in medicine is, you know, a
little bit more than just grant writing
and EMR scraping and so forth, but
really understanding a little bit more
deeply about the corpus of knowledge,
digesting that corpus of knowledge and
understanding what to do and how to do
um the next steps. Similarly, data
mining um uh is more than just um you
know just superficial things but really
getting deeply into the corpus of data.
Finding out you know what the structure
of the data is. Is there are there
outliers? Are there things that have
been missed? Um
>> what patterns there there might be um in
the medicine. So continuing a little bit
more deeply into this so-called typology
um I think the next step is uh more than
just diagnostics and more than just data
mining. Um in medicine it would be um
management patient management. So
recommendations about what to do um what
trials are available, how to enroll in
those trials or whether you qualify for
them. Um and and um in science it would
be a little more deep uh deep insights
into what the patterns of data show us,
how they manifest each other man
manifest in real life. What what could
they predict that is not already in the
data? In other words, what what what is
required? what is missing
>> um a little more depth in in sort of
real learning uh uh capacity just to go
one step deeper
um I would say um is management of and
this has already begun management of
teams and management of an AI research
assistant in the case of a science or
management of an AI nurse or potentially
even an AI doctor in the case of of
medicine
>> and we're definitely seeing a lot of
investment especially into AI nursing.
>> Exactly. Especially AI nursing. So,
exactly. So, high level care,
coordination of care, you know, when do
you come back? Um, can you get
reminders? Can you you know what what do
your values look like? Um, you know,
what what does it mean to what does it
mean to do the next steps?
>> Yeah, I was I was there's so much to
unpack. Um, and when you when you
mention the management piece, I mean,
you've spent so much time in really the
history of medicine as well as the
future. And sometimes I think about just
all the diseases, the corpus of diseases
that now we we've have, you know, ideas
of of, you know, we've given them a
name. We've we've described them that a
100 years ago we didn't even know they
existed. So, if a patient presented in a
certain way, we might say it's hyster
hysteria or any number of things. And I
think we have these same catch all
conditions today where we don't know
what's wrong with someone and we say,
"Oh, you have um you know a syndrome of
some kind and the patient doesn't feel
very satisfied by by that." So would you
add in the actual work of diagnosing a
patient including whether or not we even
recognize that the disease exists today
within kind of the body of medical
literature that we have and how could
that bridge both the medicine and the
science?
>> Well, I think you know you're you're
talking about an ancient discipline
called nosology which is of course the
classification of diseases. Um no is
changing all the time. you know what we
used to think of oh you know this is a
headache is now a thousand different
headaches
>> or cancer
>> or cancer thousand different cancers and
even those thousand different cancers
are becoming a thousand different
cancers so absolutely I think this is an
area where you know AI can handle that
information human beings really cannot
this is this reaches the limits of of
human knowledge um databases can handle
it but AI can handle it better because
it can discern sub patterns
uh that that a simple computational
algorithm cannot discern. I'll just give
you two more and I'll come back to this
this idea. Um the two more are the two
exciting ones or I should say three
more. One of them goes back to Thomas
and um the hypothesis of can
you make revolutionary not evolutionary
but revolutionary predictions about the
structure of science or medicine. So in
other words, can you synthesize
entire corpuses of knowledge, entire
fields of data into um something that
will produce more than the sum of its
parts. I mean think about what happened
in physics. Think about what's happened
in let's say
electricity and magnetism which were
thought to be completely two different
fields until someone um like Maxwell
figured out that in fact they're you
know two sides of the same coin. There
are probably in the universe of science,
biomedical science is inclusive, um,
fields that seem very disparit today,
but are actually two sides of the same
coin or manifestations of the same
field. That's a revolutionary kind of
idea. And I think now we're looking at
the real future and saying, listen, can
AI digest a corpus of knowledge and
generate truly revolutionary insights
into into field just like Maxwell did?
The next one is has to do with the other
great luminary of scientific
uh history Carl Puper. Um and Puper um
was you know of course generated the
idea of the falsifiability hypothesis
that a hypothesis in science is not a
hypothesis until it can generate its own
um falsifiable predictions. In other
words, if you tell me I have a
hypothesis in science, you should also
be able to tell me how to falsify it.
What would be the what would be the ways
in which I could prove you wrong? I just
did an exercise yesterday. Uh it's an
interesting exercise. I typed into
Google Gemini. I said, um what would be
how could I falsify the idea
um that a rat in an experiment uh knows
its way around a maze?
This was my prompt. I gave it more
detailed prompts. I'm just giving a very
high level prompt.
>> The answer was really surprising. Um, it
gave me a whole series of ideas about
how I could falsify it. I could change
the nature of the maze. I could change
the colors of the windows or the doors
in the maze. I could visually reorient
it.
>> Turn the lights off.
>> Turn the lights off. Um, you know, etc.
Interestingly, what it didn't give me
was actually something very interesting.
A scientist named Young years ago did
this experiment and he found that the
rats always found their way out in the
maze. And he
>> give the rats more credit. I guess
>> I know they It's a great story because
he was he was puzzled. He changed the
doors. He changed the orientation. He
changed everything. And then he learned
that the way that they were finding
their way around the maze was that as
they moved, the sound that they made on
the the ticking sound that they made as
their legs moved was a guide. They could
they could use that ticking. They had
made a acoustic map of the maze in their
brain. And the only way to get around
that was to put the maze on on a sandbox
where all the sound was dulled.
>> So,
>> it's fascinating. Totally fascinating.
So, but but but that's an an example.
Very soon AI will come across Young's
experiment. There's no doubt that it
will and say now add one more dimension
to it falsifiability
and add um add sand or water to the uh
to the maze so that the the the sound is
is becomes irrelevant. But but a great
example of of Pan idea. The final one
I'll give is way out of the way, not
really here today, but I believe that in
10, 20, 30 odd years, there will be um
something in science and medicine
similar to super agency. And by that I
mean that will not only generate
hypothesis, not only generate
falsifiability, not only do uh the
corpus of data but do what we consider
really creative science, which is to say
ask the question, what is an important
question? What is the way to answer that
important question? Why is it not there
yet? Um and how do we solve that
question? That's a super agent kind of
behavior. That is what real scientists
do, real doctors do to some extent.
We're not there yet. Hopefully, I won't
be out of a job, but um but I think
that's where we're going.
>> So um let's talk a little bit more about
this out of a job question because you
you landed there and I was going there.
I just had a interesting discussion with
um a friend of mine called Eric Lawson
who um works at the private equity firm
Towerbrook and he's he's very
interesting because he both knows the a
lot of the AI technologists the Sam
Almans of the world and he's also very
close with payers and the and the health
systems and
>> really makes it a point to kind of how
do you kind of connect the dots between
the two and obviously it's early innings
but what he's argued is that there have
been lots of technological revolutions
that really changed society over, you
know, the past centuries. Um, I think
obviously the printing press is a great
example of that and just what it did to
democratize access to knowledge. But as
he's looked back over these prior
revolutions, he hasn't seen something
that in his mind is so disruptive to
what he calls the intelligencia. the
people who generally work at desks who
have made a living out of being
academics out of the study that they've
done, the years of study and um I find
that really fascinating and what what he
he believes is really the right career
path to choose today is one that
involves physical presence. So, you
know, take the example of a of a
vulnerable, frail, elderly person who
needs to be helped in and out of the
bathtub. Until we have embodied AI,
which could be several decades, there
will need to be a person
>> far. I mean, robotics,
>> maybe it's sooner.
>> Robotics is moving pretty fast.
>> Okay. Well, let's assume it's, you know,
10 years before that becomes super
feasible and then it takes time to roll
that out into homes across the country.
But to him that seemed further off than
say, you know, a a physician um or a
healthcare administrator or somebody who
is really relying on their own corpus of
knowledge where you know there's
obviously human fallibility. It's been a
really long time since most physicians
went to medical school. Um they don't
have the full corpus of medical texts
and knowledge just instantly available
to them. um whereas you know AI is
rapidly moving in that direction. So do
you agree with that with that thesis
that it's coming after um
>> the intelligencia or do you do you think
that there is some something that maybe
is off about it or it's too simplistic?
>> I think it's a little simplistic um in
the sense that I'll give you a couple of
examples. Corpus of knowledge is an
important thing and it's very valuable.
Um statistics are very valuable.
Patients like statistics. They want the
numbers. They want real numbers, but
they also want care. U they want that
delivered to them with care. And they
want um what Steven Gould once called
the um um you know there's a very famous
essay by Gould in which he talks about
the the the curve the Gaussian curve
that everyone inhabits. So you know when
you have a disease you fall in a curve,
right? So you're on the right side or
the left side of the curve. right side
being you know even though the
statistics are etc etc etc I believe
that you'll be okay because of x y or z
reason some of them might be intuitive
or you'll be on the right side of the
curve or you won't won't be okay um
because of x y or z reason I think
patients are looking for something more
than bare statistics even bare
statistics from the corpus of knowledge
they're looking for the doctor to
finally having digested those statistics
whether they come from AI or they come
from whatever they're looking for things
like reassurance.
>> But can't one could argue that LLMs, you
know, there's been studies that show
that the empathy that's being provided
through these LLMs is already keeping I
think maybe even outpacing from a
patient um perspective what they are
getting from their physicians. I mean,
>> well, that's partly because physicians
don't have time yet, but
>> Yes. So, that that's where I was going
to go is is they don't have and there
was an interesting um column that just
came out a few months ago in stat where
a physician argued that all these
studies were unfair because of the 8
minute visit that physicians currently
are stuck with. It's not their
preference. They don't want to treat
patients in 8 minute intervals. It's the
system that created that. So they would
argue that if they were given more time
and this if the system was structured
differently, the incentives are
different, they would have room for that
empathy.
>> Well, and it's also remember empathy is
not something empathy is not something
that's mechanical. It can be simulated
mechanically. A machine could tell you
that I'm really sorry. How can I help
you more? Can I get you services? All of
this can be done by a machine. Here's
something that a machine can't do. It
can't at the end of a visit touch you in
a way that's non-threatening, nonsexual,
but really touch you and say, "I think
it's going to be all right." I often say
those I often say those words if I think
they're correct, but I say it with some
humility. I say, "I think I don't say I
know." These are the words I don't say.
I don't say statistics show us that
you're going to be all right. I say
looking at you I think you're going to
be all right and I think um the next
visit will tell us a lot more because
this is not a point of care this is a
journey that we start together I'll be
with you with with you during this
journey and there'll be lots of forks in
the road you it might be
>> you'll be admitted to the hospital one
day you'll be short of breath another
day you a medicine will not work for you
a third day u and I say that's going to
be fine because I'm going to be there
with you in your journey.
>> You know, I think about journalism too
and I think about medicine and these are
all areas that clearly are going to be
disrupted by AI. And where I've
personally leaned is to think of myself
as somebody who communicates what I am
observing in the field. So, I don't
think that, and maybe I'm wrong, but I
don't think an an LLM is has that that
institutional knowledge of having been
around in an industry for 15 years and
um meeting say a CEO when they were
first starting the business and hearing
about all the things that they thought
they could do and ended up not being
able to do and having that context for
why they weren't successful in some
areas and they were in others and being
able to share I think a lot of that what
I think of as really the the in the
field knowledge that you have to have
human experiences to be able to know
these things and I wonder about that
with physicians as well because you know
look at oncology if somebody gets a
diagnosis of of cancer it's what you've
seen as a clinician who's treated lots
of patients with with cancer that I
would think is really what the patient
may want to know like what is it really
like to have that diagnosis how will I
>> and what is the what there's a textural
quality that's missing still
>> yes
>> I mean LLMs will c again I don't want to
only talk about LLMs I want to talk
about discovery as well LLMs have a lot
of and they will eventually capture
texture I think but there's a textural
element missing obviously I mean I do a
lot of work with LLMs and I do a lot of
work with AI in general there's a
textural quality that's missing I'll
give you two examples one is um patient
comes to me and has a particular problem
as a consequence of their cancer. Let's
say their kidneys are not working. Okay,
I have 15 consultants that I can send
them to.
But I know from looking at this patient
that this one particular consultant has
the behavioral biology, has the bedside
manner, the the kind that will fit this
patient. Another patient would be
completely different. And another
patient is, you know, I'm all about
numbers and statistics and I I want a
person who tells me, you know, etc., you
know, all the truths about my disease. I
send them to different people.
>> Now, eventually AI will capture. So,
this is what I call intuitive knowledge,
learn knowledge. Of course, eventually
LLM will capture that um because this is
knowledge. Their job is to capture
knowledge. But it's they're not there
yet. And it's not clear to me how I
would share that knowledge. That's the
other problem.
You know, would I write for Dr.
Chelapati? I would say empathetic but
statistically
uh savvy on the other hand can tell
patients diagnosis about their disease
in 15 minutes as opposed to spending an
hour with them, you know, walking them
through the science. In principle, I
could type that into an LLM, but I'm not
sure I it I'm not sure I could capture
that. I know it. I I I know I have I've
worked with this physician before.
And then I'll give you a flip example.
>> It's almost instinct or something
innate.
>> There is an there's an instinctive
quality about this.
>> And yes, I think that in the end they if
they are fed the information, they will
capture that information.
The question that I would ask in return
is
what is the incentive
for the true intelligencia
to feed that information into an LLM?
Why would we put ourselves out of a job?
>> It's a fair point.
>> I can imagine getting help from an LLM
to diagnose a patient that helps me. I
can imagine getting a you know helping
them do helping me with billing.
I don't I can't imagine unless we decide
as a society that we'll put all our
intuitive boxes into a corpus of
knowledge which we could do especially
for future generations. We could do all
of that. I just don't see the incentives
aligning. Similarly in science
I could put a lot of information and I
don't even need to put a lot of
information. The machine will go and
learn a lot of information but I don't
see myself putting my deepest intuitions
into a machine. I won't even know how to
do it. I I make medicines. I make drugs.
Okay. Some targets are considered
undruggable so far. Maybe with machine
learning we can figure with AI we can
figure out how to we're actually working
on this right now. It's a problem that's
a big problem we're working on right
now. How am I approaching the problem?
I'm approaching the problem in diverse
ways. Sometimes I dream about it.
Sometimes I wake up with an idea. I
write it down etc. You know I say well
maybe a cyclical peptide or peptide like
drug will fit into this pocket.
>> I love that you dream about cyclical
peptides.
>> What do you dream about? Not that.
>> Okay. All right. Well, so sometimes I
say to you, okay, you know, maybe a
cyclical peptide will fit in. And then I
wake up and I write it down. Now, am I
really in incentivized to tell my
ML that a cyclical peptide is likely to
fit into that pocket? Not really. I'll
try it, but and that's passive learning.
And maybe behind the scenes,
surreptitiously,
the model will say, "Oh, wait a second.
and he's been trying cyclical peptides.
There must be something in there. So,
the next time I'm going to start
generating cyclical peptides for him.
Could be. I just don't see it happening.
So, we touched a little bit on discovery
and I want to go deeper there. Um, I've
been, you know, for years meeting with
companies and spending time with
companies that are focused on using AI
for drug discovery. I think the first
generation not as successful for a lot
of reasons that that we can talk about.
This new generation seems to be more
more sophisticated in the approach. I
think more more recognizing the
strengths that a lot of these biotech
and pharma companies already have within
their own teams. They have their own
technology teams in house which I think
was perhaps missed with some of the
prior companies in this space. But then
there's also, you know, some interesting
stuff I've seen around things like drug
repurposing. So using a drug for a
different purpose than we use it for
today. Could it be used to treat a
condition? There's so many rare diseases
that have no treatments whatsoever.
Could we use AI to, you know, dig into
this trove of already FDA approved drugs
um that have gone through trials and see
if there is another purpose for that
drug. And I think those that's a really
interesting use case as well and it's
still early days but I'm I'm I'm equally
fascinated by that. So would love your
thoughts on just where you see discovery
going and what has been learned from say
the first generation to try to do this
to what we're seeing today.
>> Well let me ask you answer your last
question first which is about drug
repurposing. I mean you know David
Fagenbomb has written yes a wonderful
book about this.
>> I just saw his uh his talk.
>> Yeah. So um so so there are certainly
examples of that. I mean if you were
were to ask me I think that the
pharmacopia that we have the total
universe of drugs that we have for human
diseases is pretty small. Chemical space
is really vast vast you know more than
people say sometimes more than the stars
in the Milky Way and we are operating on
a tiny tiny little um arena of chemical
space. So there's lots more chemical
matter to discover. So so yes, I I
absolutely I believe in repurposing
drugs, but I think given the smallness
of the chemical space and the very
particular kinds of um diseases that
we're talking about rare diseases, it's
not clear how far we can how much
traction we can get out of that. But now
we can come to the question of
discovery.
um the first generation of discovery in
AI
really used I would say first generation
tools and the first generation tools
were not just not great tools so they
were tools like you know let's take
known chemical space so again not
diversify around chemical space dock the
uh dock by by docking I mean fit the
drug like a puzzle piece into the
protein which is the maybe the causal uh
problem and do it again and again like
solving a puzzle by taking one piece
putting it in saying no it doesn't fit
second piece putting it in no doesn't
fit etc etc until you reach a billion
pieces that's not real AI that's
computationally intensive drug discovery
using you know um a library of of
compounds we're now into the second and
third generation of AI where you have
we're doing much much more interesting
things. Things like asking the question
if you'll take a protein can you do an
abstraction of it? Can you do what's
feature extraction and say let me forget
about the protein let me do an
extraction of the features of the
protein. You know here's a wall if you
imagine a pocket where the drug might
fit. Here's a wall that is electrically
charged. Here's a wall that's not.
Here's another wall that's very tight.
here's a wall etc. And then using that
feature extraction to go back into the
library and ask the question what
molecules fit that feature extraction.
That would be a kind of a second
generation approach. A third generation
approach which I think is the most
interesting is to say okay let me
feature extract and then let me grow the
medicine.
Grow meaning generatively and this is
where generative chemistry comes in. Let
me grow the medicine just like you know
an ivy plant grows its roots into a
little crevice in the wall. It feels
around it says okay there's a little
crevice over here. I'm going to extend a
root over here. No, it doesn't fit. I'm
going to withdraw it. I'm going to go
this way.
>> I love that. I love that image.
>> Yeah, that's generative chemistry. And
then you still need medical chemists
saying, "Oh, you've come up with a
structure that can't be made. It's not
energetically feasible. Throw that one
out." Okay. So there's now the third
example that I described is of course
what we're very interested in. And it is
an example in which we're really using
the learning capacity of AI, not using
just the computational brute force
capacity. Take one piece, take it out.
Take a second piece, take it out. That's
not how you and I solve puzzles. If you
think about how you and I solve how your
child solves a puzzle, you know, this is
why I think it's very important. My
general message to people who do AI is
to do two things. Ask the experts and
ask children.
>> I've got some children.
>> I know.
>> I volunteer.
>> I know. But listen, remember, children
are learning machines.
Experts have corpuses of knowledge. If
you combine an expert with a child,
you'll get an incredible device because
the child is a learning machine. The
child will ask questions like, "Why are
you doing this this way?" If you go to a
take a take a child to a doctor's office
and make them look at how billing is
done, and they'll say, "That's the
stupidest thing I've ever seen in my
life."
>> And they would be right.
>> Wow. I love that. It's really
fascinating advice. Um, and what but
what about the role of just we we've
touched on the system? Like if we were
to take the what you just said a little
bit further, which is why do we do this
stupid thing with the way that we do
billing, the real answer is because the
system requires it and the system has
its own incentives and it has its own
messed up, you know, companies that are
operating in ways that make absolutely
no sense, but it's about it's about
money and it's about how they make how
they make money and, you know, all the
things that are wrong about the system.
And taking that back to discovery, I
mean, it's it's been said many times
that it it costs a billion dollars to
create a new drug. And that is the
problem with creating drugs for rare
diseases. Um, in a nutshell, although
it's far more complex than that, and
when you add up all the rare diseases,
it's actually a very large number of
people affected. But then with these
strategies that we we've been
discussing, is there a way do you think
just by using different tools and a
different methodology to start to bring
the cost down or will we forever kind of
face a system and its messed up
incentives um that may thwart some of
this progress that a child would say
makes all the sense in the world.
>> So I think we're already there. Um, I
think that if you are a pharmaceutical
company and you're not using
um computational and AI tools, you're
behind the ball and you need to start
using them today. You need to start
getting to know them because otherwise
you're going to be not just behind the
ball, you're going to be far behind the
ball. Um, that doesn't mean that you
fire your med chemist. You're med I told
you you're, you know, the things that AI
can come up with can be absurd. your med
chemist can take one look at it and say
that's never going to work. That's got,
you know, a parazol ring that is going
to react immediately and get destroyed
in blood. You still need your med
chemists. Don't fire them. Um, but you
need an AI team because as I said, your
med chemist can only come up with
chemical matter in a limited context and
they're using their corpus of knowledge
which is also limited and is slowly
expiring because new medicines are
coming out. I mean just yesterday is a
good example. Um, I was looking at a AI
generated
compound that um had a problem. There
was a liability. We call them
liabilities. They're basically a problem
with the compound. And it was very
soluble in
uh fat and oil, but was very insoluble
in water. Now, that's a problem because
ultimately, even though the drugs have
to pass through into cells, which means
that they have to be at least somewhat
soluble in fat because otherwise they
can't move through the cell membrane
which is made out of fat. But you can't
formulate the drug because ultimately
you you don't swallow a drug in fat,
right? You swallow a drug in water
um either as a liquid or a suspension or
an IV or whatever. And
>> you can imagine I've got this image of
somebody putting a drug in a a giant
cube of butter and
>> Exactly. having having the butter for
Exactly. The problem is that the butter
then gets emulsified in your stomach and
then you're back in water.
>> Don't do that at home.
>> Don't do that at home. Exactly.
>> But anyway, it doesn't matter. Um, and
then the med chemist said, you know,
there's this new class of molecules
which you can substitute for one of the
molecules that we had or one of the
little pieces that we had and said
there's a new class of molecules which
will solve your problem and we're trying
them now. Will it work? I don't know.
But that's an example of a med chemist
and the AI collaborating with the AI
generated something. It was very helpful
but had a problem. The med chemist had a
corpus of knowledge and was able to use
that corpus of knowledge new knowledge
in fact because they had to keep up with
the literature. You can't be rest on
your laurels and go home but was able to
solve that problem.
>> So I'm going to tell you a little bit
about what worries me and then I' I'd
love your thought on on this as well. Um
I had a friend over a few weeks ago who
um used to work at Google on some of the
self-driving autonomous vehicle stuff
and they had this one weekend um this is
according a story that was shared with
me so may not be a thousand% accurate
for anybody listening who has worked at
Google um but I think the idea behind it
is important which is that they some of
the engineers were basically told to
drive around a Whimo um for a weekend
and test it out but they were told,
>> but they were not driving. They were
sitting in the back seat.
>> No, they were told to um test it out,
but then always, you know, be present,
keep your eye on the road, and most
importantly is have your hands on the on
the steering wheel.
>> Um and so I'm sure you can guess what
happened. Um they had their hands on the
steering wheel for about 5 minutes and
then started futing around with social
media and then started having chats and
rolling down the window and, you know,
talking to friends and and you name it.
just kind of rolling around kind of
fully autonomous in this vehicle doing
exactly what you would expect human
beings to do. And I think the point of
this story is that we can get quite lazy
when faced with things that seem like
they're basically trusted um when put in
a mode of being fully autonomous. We can
we have this tendency to just kind of go
with it. And you've seen that as well
with kind of airline pilots over time
forgetting how to fly planes. And so
what worries me is that we
>> children forgetting how to read.
>> Yes. So like what if what if we've
created something that maybe is 95%
correct and and 5% totally missing
context um or or missing something that
is fundamentally true about science. Um
and then over time it gets to 96 97 98
and then what what when do we get to the
point where the company either says
let's fire the med chemists cuz this is
basically good enough or the med
chemists just feel that most of the time
they're just ticking the box and saying
you know let's go with it and then stop
really interrogating. Ah so you're
asking a very important question but
remember in medicine I can talk about
the narrow domain of medicine which is
different from whimo the narrow domain
of medicine and medical uh uh innovation
is that the readout is a human clinical
trial
and the human clinical trial if it fails
means the company's wiped out. There's
no future. You've lost a billion
dollars. So the stakes in a human
clinical trial first of all are highly
unbiased. It's a phase three. You're
blinded. It's placebo controlled. It has
a statistical measure. It has end points
etc etc. And there's a history behind
this. The history behind this was you
know the h the randomized clinical trial
the placebo control clinical trial was
only invented
in the 1950s by many people including
Austin Bradford Hill. I write about it
in in my book precisely for this reason.
Precisely for the reason that human
beings can become lazy. They can become
biased. They can become you know they
can lose sight of of of everything. But
statistics and clinical trials in
statistics
um don't lie. They can't lie. And so
it'll take one example when the med
chemist was sleeping at the wheel in to
mix metaphors with your whimo but was
sleeping at the wheel the trial didn't
work because of a formulation problem
and then all of a sudden all the drug
companies will be like go get the med
chemist back. The reason I'm making this
distinction is that in many spheres of
our lives,
we don't use
um very rigorous methods for evaluation.
If let's say Whimo launched an
experiment
for whatever reason in which they asked
the question was the minutia of accuracy
um the same between drivers who did not
or did
get off the wheel. It was true
experiment. They generated true
knowledge and there was true difference.
They would all of a sudden say no no no.
you have to keep your hands on the wheel
because we aren't there yet. So what I'm
trying to say is that there will always
be examples where the stakes are so high
airline pilots one plane crashes and the
airline pilot has you know remember is
no longer no longer has their hands off
the wheel and they're two in case one of
them falls asleep or has a heart attack
right so when stakes are high enough and
they should be I think we always human
beings have the capacity to invent
invent backup systems and invent systems
in which they don't make themselves
obsolete. And do you think that that is
also true on the kind of pure clinical
diagnostic side where clinical decision
support that's certainly going to be in
our future already is um you're a
physician you're looking at a series of
kind of what are the potential options
of treatment that I can prescribe what
are the options around next steps some
of it generated by by you some of it by
an LLM that's ingested a lot of
information
at some point perhaps the LLM
suggestions start kind of becoming more
and more routine maybe more and more
trusted do you worry that there there
comes a sort of natural endp point to
this where it is just deferred to
>> yeah I I think you're you're pointing
out a much more much more complex
example where you know the stakes are
are just as high for the patient but are
not as high in the sense that you know
the patient won't die if they get the
wrong diagnosis initially
and then they get re redirected you know
once it finds once you find out that
they they haven't I think I think
there's a worry about about that
scenario you know this is the the stakes
are not that high if children don't
learn calculus right by the way if you
type it into any of these programs um
you they'll do calculus for you
>> I don't think I even remember calculus
on
>> it doesn't matter That's a good example,
right? The stakes aren't weren't that
high, right? We know that some children
need to learn calculus.
Not everyone, but some children need to
learn calculus. Not everyone. Some
children need to learn statistics. Some
children need to learn how to write. And
I I suspect that what's going to happen
is that what will end up here's the
optimistic vision. The optimistic vision
is that they won't learn how to draw in
the mechanical sense, but they'll still
be artists because the because human
beings will perceive the mechanical
drawing uh so quickly that we become
bored of it. Similarly, in the sciences,
human beings will become so bored of the
routine
um corpus of knowledge digestions that
we'll become bored of it and say,
"Listen, we better start teaching kids
science again." In the case of you know
very powerful
so medical diagnosis is a very
interesting example because it relies
very strongly on a on a large corpus of
knowledge, right? And the larger it is,
the better you are at the medical at
medical diagnostics. So there are some
serious areas where you know the idea of
obsolescence
becomes a dangerous idea because
obsolescence means that you know you
don't contribute to you don't contribute
further to the corpus of knowledge.
Remember at least LLMs not generative AI
but at least LLMs are still dependent on
the corpus on the corpus of knowledge. I
keep coming back to this word corpus. It
seems seems like I'm sort of you know
saying this over and over again. AI in
in the LLMs is only as good as what it's
fed. If we stopped writing books
tomorrow, which we could, all of a
sudden we'd bring this whole engine to a
halt. Um if I didn't write a new version
of Emperor of All Malades tomorrow,
right? It would be very hard to for an
engine to digest what has happened over
the last 15 odd years. It could do it.
It would probably do a bad job of it. It
would be biased. People write lots of
articles about how great their
inventions are. They don't turn out to
be that great. Someone needs to do some
sort of like judgment on it, etc., etc.
So I suspect what's going to happen is
that human beings will soon realize that
that it's a human-fed
LLM machine generative AI separately. Uh
as but as far as you know uh language
models are concerned without human
feeding I don't think we get very far.
>> For those listening to this who may be
thinking about a career in the medical
profession what what specialty would you
tell them to choose? what specialty
would you tell them to avoid? Um I will
say that I often hear radiology
pathology is in the avoid um camp.
Sometimes sometimes primary care and
then the you know what do you choose? Um
it seems like everybody's getting
boarded right now in obesity medicine
and we also see kind of areas
specialties of of lifestyle remain
remaining popular but I think this kind
of AI aspect is going to you know that's
a big reason why the the void
specialties have been put on that list.
So what would you advise somebody?
>> You know I don't tell anyone to avoid
anything. I what I just tell them is I
say to them look in whatever field of
medicine you're going to go into you now
require twice as much creativity which
is a good thing by the way medical
people felt as if they were being
sidelined in terms of their creative uh
uh profession the creative knowledge
you'll have to use twice as much as your
creativ creativity hopefully you'll have
you your time will be freed up um so
you'll have time to to exercise that
creativity
But third and most important and I wrote
a piece about this in the times uh way
back when um I often tell people great
choose pathology fine but choose if you
choose pathology go deeply into one
arena of pathology where you can apply
true creative knowledge and generate
true creative knowledge. I always say
the the word generate is most important
because remember it's the generation
that's feeding the AI and as long as we
can generate
knowledge uh not just assimilate
knowledge not just copy knowledge but
generate true knowledge I think we're
safe as
>> I love that and I also would add there
that I think medicine has not been as
entrepreneurial
>> yes
>> in the last you know since really the
last 20 is and um I'm starting to see
more of this opportunity and part of it
connected to the time and part of it
connected to the efficiencies for
physicians to be business people to be
>> and that's part of generating knowledge.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So
>> different kind of knowledge but it's
generating knowledge.
>> We forget that it used to be a very
entrepreneurial you could be a small
business owner if you went into medicine
you could run a chain of practices. It's
it's less that way. It's it's um it's
sad, but I think uh I think there is
that that massive opportunity ahead.
Wow, what an incredible conversation as
always.
>> Great. Lovely to chat.
>> Yeah, we've we need to check back in and
you know, maybe say call it a year and
just kind of see what's happened
>> and let's see what's happening here.